Dominance Matrices in the AFL



Using dominance matrices creates the ability to rank teams accurately even if they haven’t competed against each other in a season. 
Our goal is to see if the dominance matrix method applied to the 2022 season after a certain number of rounds will give similar team rankings as the actual ladder after round 23.
A dominance matrix D of (m), with (m) being after a certain number of rounds between 10 and 23, is produced through either wins/loses or score difference. Walter (2011) suggests that using scores rather than wins and losses may be more accurate, however, doesn’t give a clear solution and again leaving it open for interpretation. Due to the large sample size and percentage (%) already being a feasible measure for score difference measurement We will be using wins/loses. This will be achieved by assigning 4 points per win, 0 points per loss and 2 points per a draw 
Via the following calculation, r1 = D(m)1 − (D(m))^T 1, a first order ranking (r1) is established which is the most significant indicator in ranking teams.
We can distinguish which teams are better than others as wins being the aim of the game and therefore the most significant measure hence why Walter (2011) supports this as first order ranking (r). 

A second order ranking is then calculated, which indicates how many other teams beat that team and is the second most significant indicator in ranking teams. For example, If team 1 beats team 2 who then beats team 3, then 1 has a second order dominance over team 3. The numbers in the D2 matrix show how many second order dominances a given team has over another. This is done by squaring D(m) to create D^2(m) and placed into the following formula, r2 = (D(m))^2 1 − ((D(m))^2)T 1. 
Walter (2011) suggests, supported by Swift (2009), that the second order ranking should be multiplied by 0.5 due to being less significant, however, Walter himself questions how accurate this is and leaves it open for interpretation. As we know the outcome of the AFL season and no other suggestions from Walter (2011) and the initial support from Swift (2009) we will be using 0.5 to multiply second order ranking (r2) in the following equation r = r1 + 0.5r2 
Finally, in case when for some rounds two teams played twice only the average of both scores will be considered and the winner awarded from that calculation. Rounds 10, 16 and 22 will be used for calculations for even distribution of early to late season.


Prior to discussion of the results from the dominance matrix it is important to know, after the conclusion of the 2022 AFL season 11 teams were separated by 1 or more ladder positions based off percentage and 2 teams were separated by 1 ladder position due to a draw. Taking this into consideration the results presented after the conclusion of round 22 are accurate with 8 teams being correctly represented still with one round to go which ultimately changed the top 8 for multiple teams with 6 teams shifting positions. This stayed consistent after round 16 with 5 teams being accurately represented and 3 teams off by 1 position. The same cannot be concluded after round 10 with only 2 teams being represented accurately however 7 off by 1 position. That remark can be distracted however by the fact that 5 teams were misrepresented by 5 positions or more.
In the case of these results the most accurate representation was after 22 rounds, followed by 16 and finally 10. However due to the chaotic nature of the season after round 16 provided accurate results.
Discussing the reliability of this method is peculiar. Early in the season I would not trust this method as there are many factors including team chemistry and finding form etc. that come into play before a team’s ability can be accurately shown.  An example of this includes that 3 teams were inside the top 8 after round 10 and the eventual premiers who finished first were in 6th position. From a mathematical and statistical point of view I do feel like it can be reliable as long as each team’s predicted ranking is taken with a grain of salt, for example after 10 rounds instead of assuming Geelong will finish 7th we can use the data to say, Geelong are on track to finish 7th at this given pace and therefore must change something tactically. 


For the best possible formula to produce the most accurate results, firstly we must discuss percentage. As stated, before 11 teams were separated based off percentage therefore a way to eliminate this and further separate teams would be by using score differences as the value in the matrix. For example, if a team won by 10 points, they would receive a 10 in their place and the latter a 0 rather than a 4 and a 0.  An alternative could also be to change the weighting of the r1 and r2 values in the r formula. Due to the long-winded AFL season, I feel the r2 value may benefit from being higher than 0.5. For example, West Coast and North Melbourne after round 16 were closely represented,  however with an r2 value of 0.75, North Melbourne plummets in ranking in comparison. This is due to West Coast defeating higher ranked teams including Collingwood whereas North Melbourne had only defeated West Coast. To further aid this higher order rankings is a common suggestion however may not be useful. A 3rd order ranking in a dominance matrix means that each team has been ranked three times based on their interactions with other members of the group. As there is 18 teams and 23 rounds teams only face 5 teams a year twice therefore providing an order with little influence on the ranking of teams.
A limitation of the dominance matrix which is vital to AFL as it’s a national level game is there is no way to account for home and away advantages. For example, its much harder to defeat Fremantle at their home ground compared to the MCG which is a Victorian home ground. Another limitation this cannot account for is injuries, coaching staff changes, and a plethora of other internal factors a team must face through a season. Lastly there is not any consideration of tactics that teams use simply are they successful or not which is not particularly useful data for coaching staff. 
